---
draft: true
---
Open source and SaaS. If you're in tech you've probably heard of these terms being thrown around here and there and even if you aren't into tech chances that you have at some point interacted with a product defined by these two terms are very high. 

Open source by definition includes software whose source is publicly made available to everyone. Now even though the source code is freely made available for everyone to inspect and check that nothing shady is going on behind the scenes, it doesn't necessary mean that it has to be free. Same goes for [free software](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html) _free as in speech not as in beer_, that puts emphasis on the freedom of the user front and center to do whatever they want with it. Even though free software and Open source might interlap in so many ways in their definition, free software is well .. software while an open source project might be just a [couple lines of code](https://qz.com/646467/how-one-programmer-broke-the-internet-by-deleting-a-tiny-piece-of-code/) you make public. GNU + Linux, VLC, Blender, anything that has the apache rubber stamp on it are all open source. Big companies too, after seeing the success of open source projects have also open sourced some of their work. VScode by Microsoft, Angular 2 by Google and react by Facebook open source are some top tier tools which, if we to turn back time to two decades ago, would probably and most likely be propritary.  Heck at some point in History Java was proprietary.

Switching gears to the other elephant in this virtual room, we have Software as a Service (SaaS) is a product or Software that is made available to users over the internet for a subscription. Netflix, Spotify, Crunchyroll etc. Any software that must be connected to the internet to work and that you must pay for can be defined as a SaaS product.

Most of the SaaS products are proprietary and their code is hidden from their users, unless you're [twitch](https://www.windowscentral.com/massive-twitch-leak-reportedly-surfaces-online-including-source-code-and-streamer-payouts) offcourse. Why? Because most of these platforms are [extorting millions and millions](https://pawtocol.medium.com/how-much-is-user-data-worth-f2b1b0432136#:~:text=A%20recent%20report%20estimated%20the,worth%20about%20%2435%20per%20month.) of dollars from you by selling your data, but hey, you get to watch the latest greatest show by Leonardo DiCaprio and go to Twitter to share your opinion with the entire planet? (I'm not being sarcastic) 

I know the tension is killing most of you reading this masterpiece of a blog post, wanting to know what I am trying to sell you. Let's change that. *Shay* [ello](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=ello) *to my lil* [frien](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=frien)*!!!!!* Chatwood an open source software as a service product that allows companies to not only interact with their ccustomers/clients not only from the website alone, but also from other social mediums such as WhatsApp, FaceBook and Instagram. So why Chatwood? What makes it better than the rest if the bunch.

To paraphrase an article by big commerce on the importance of open source suggested, by removing the barriers to the barries between innovators, open sourced projects allow and drive competition and innovations within the community, enabling new or improving on previous projects. Chatwood is a perfect embodiment of this sentiment. The project, initially a customer support software failed to take off as a business and was shut down, but to the surprise of the maintainers, got a lot of love from the community when they decided to open source it during the Hacktoberfest. This is hugely thanks to the support from contribution from open source contributors which has enabled it thrive and compete with industry SaaS giants that also offer customer support software. 

By integrating the open source community to their community the maintainer of Chatwood have enabled new and innovative ideas to be incorporated into their product while also getting support to fix previous bugs. This makes Chatwood even more secure. It is very possible .We see it everyday when a hacker finds a vulnerability in a proprietary software and decides to exploit it because the security team did not see it or had not one experienced enough to find that security bug and patch it. This is different for open source companies. While security buts do exist and are common place to anything that is ones and zeros, open source companies have the added benefit that everyone has access to the code and the permission to modify it while ting for security flaws without the worry of having to worry about the End User Agreements that users of proprietary software. Chatwood also enjoys this added advantage. With developers from across the globe analyzing  and testing the code for any vulnerabilities and patches being ruled out for fixes, you can be sure that your customers will be safe from exploitations and even if a bug is discovered someone from the community will be quick enough to roll out a patch for the fix. Another way that an open source project is taking on industry giants. 

Finally open source projects enjoy the benefit of longevity because someone somewhere and especially new comers to the open source world, is always looking a project to contribute to. As previously stated Chatwood died once but thanks but after three days... no, no, not that story... Chatwood as a proprietary project once shut down because it did not take off. But once it because open source contributions from around the world and from newcomers started coming in. The maintainers may even decide to hand over the project to new ones but they can be assured that support from the community will still be coming in. A good example of this longevity is GNU + Linux - the powerhouse operating system that drives the internet - Although the project has been around for over two decades it is still thriving and going on strong. This is not because GNU + Linux has some hidden piece of code that is monetized. Nop. It is because of the strong open source community behind it. When it started folks in the tech industry were hungry for an operating system that they could extend and they still are. There are no limitations on what you can do with it, extend it as you please and configure it according to what you like and dislike. As with Chatwood, you can also self host and extend some of the functionality if the default configuration does not please you. A feature that industry giant proprietary software do not come with.





